    *

      A classic humanist alternative to a Christian Grace is:

      A Secular Grace:

          For what we are about to receive
          let us be truly thankful
          …to those who planted the crops
          …to those who cultivated the fields
          …to those who gathered the harvest.

          For what we are about to receive
          let us be truly thankful
          to those who prepared it and those who served it.

          In this festivity let us remember too
          those who have no festivity
          those who cannot share this plenty
          those whose lives are more affected than our own
          by war, oppression and exploitation
          those who are hungry, sick and cold

          In sharing in this meal
          let us be truly thankful
          for the good things we have
          for the warm hospitality 
          and for this good company. 

    *

      There is also this from the humanist writer Nicolas Walter:

          Let us think thrice while we are gathering here for this meal.  
          First, let us think of the people we are with today, and
          make the most of the pleasure of sharing food and drink together.  
          Then, let us think of the people who made the food and drink and brought it to us,
          who serve us and wait on us, 
          and who clear up and clean up after us.  
          Finally, let us think of all the people all over the world, 
          members with us in the human family, 
          who will not have a meal today.

    *

      For those who find these humanist graces too long, or don't want to be reminded of the suffering of others just before a
      celebratory meal, there are these simple words of secular thanks and good wishes:

          We are thankful for the food on this table.
          We are thankful for this time together.
          Our thoughts go out to family and friends;
          We hope that they are safe and well.

    *

      Or these words of humanist benediction:

          For the meal we are about to eat,
          for those that made it possible,
          and for those with whom we are about to share it,
          we are thankful.

    *

      George Rodger, of Aberdeen, Scotland, used this god-free grace at the start of a wedding meal:

          Let us enjoy good food and good drink,
          And let us thank all whose efforts have set them before us;
          Let us enjoy good companionship,
          And let us each one be good company to the others;
          Let us enjoy ourselves, without guilt,
          But let us not forget that many are less fortunate.

    *

      Here's a beautiful Buddhist meal gatha that is entirely secular:

          We receive this food in gratitude to all beings
          Who have helped to bring it to our table,
          And vow to respond in turn to those in need
          With wisdom and compassion.

    *

      Or how about this variation on a Native American thanks giving:

          We give thanks for the plants and animals who have given themselves so that we can enjoy this meal together.
          We also give thanks for our friends and family who have traveled here today.
          May this meal bring us strength and health.

    *

      A secular version of the famous "Serenity Prayer" can also work before a meal:

          Grant me the serenity
          to accept the things I cannot change,
          the courage to change the things I can,
          and the wisdom to know the difference.

      The Quaker tradition of "silent grace" before meals also works well for a dinner party with
people of diverse religions and beliefs. All present join hands in a circle around the table, and
are silent for half a minute or so as they collect their thoughts, meditate or pray. Then one person
gently squeezes the hands of the people seated adjacent; this signal is quickly passed around the
table and people then begin to eat and talk.  *

      Sweet Reason, the humanist advice columnist, responds to a father's request for a "secular
grace" for his daughter's wedding reception.  *

      And finally there are these words of wisdom from William Shakespeare:

          "...good company, good wine, good welcome, can make good people"
          Sir Henry Guildford: Henry VIII, I, iv


Soren Kierkegaard

"Truth always rests with the minority, and the minority is always stronger than the majority,
because the minority is generally formed by those who really have an opinion, while the strength of
a majority is illusory, formed by the gangs who have no opinion -- and who, therefore, in the next
instant (when it is evident that the minority is the stronger) assume its opinion... while truth
again reverts to a new minority."
